README.md, before:

# `pyHYDRA`
**pyHYDRA** is the fast python implementation of the semi-supervised clustering method: [HYDRA](https://github.com/evarol/HYDRA). Moreover, pyHYDRA also allows binary classification tasks following good practice proposed in [AD-ML](https://github.com/aramis-lab/AD-ML).

Compared to the matlab implementation of HYDRA, pyHYDRA has the following advantages:
- Computationally faster with multi-threads implementation;
- More complex cross-validation (CV) strategy, e.g., repeated hold-out CV for 100 repetitions;
- Additional functionality for binary classification following [state-of-the-art](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S105381191630595X) cross-validation procedures.

## Installation
[Ananconda](https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual) allows you to install, run and update python package and their dependencies. We highly recommend the users to install **Anancond3** on your machine.
After installing Anaconda3, there are three choices to use pyHYDRA.
### Use pyHYDRA as a python package
We recommend the users to use Conda virtual environment:
```
1) conda create --name pyHYDRA python=3.6
```
Activate the virtual environment:
```
2) source activate pyHYDRA
```
Install other python package dependencies (go to the root folder of pyHYDRA):
```
3) ./install_requirements.sh
```
Finally, we need install pyHYDRA from PyPi:
```
3) pip install pyHYDRA==1.0.1
```

### Use pyHYDRA from commandline:
To come soon.

### Use pyHYDRA as a developer version:
```
python -m pip install git+https://github.com/anbai106/pyHYDRA.git
```

## Input structure
pyHYDRA requires a specific input structure inspired by [BIDS](https://bids.neuroimaging.io/).
Some conventions for the group label/diagnosis: -1 represents healthy control (**CN**) and 1 represents patient (**PT**); categorical variables, such as sex, should be encoded to numbers: Female for 0 and Male for 1, for instance.

### feature and covariate tsv
The first 3 columns are **participant_id**, **session_id** and **diagnosis**.

Example for feature tsv:
```
participant_id    session_id    diagnosis    ROI1    ROI2 ...
sub-CLNC0001      ses-M00    -1   432.1    596.9
sub-CLNC0002      ses-M00    1    398.2    601.3
sub-CLNC0003      ses-M00    -1    412.0    567.3
sub-CLNC0004      ses-M00    -1    487.4    600.1
sub-CLNC0005      ses-M00    1    346.5    529.5
sub-CLNC0006      ses-M00    1    443.2    663.2
sub-CLNC0007      ses-M00    -1    450.2    599.3
sub-CLNC0008      ses-M00    1    443.2    509.4
```
Example for covariate tsv:
```
participant_id    session_id    diagnosis    age    sex ...
sub-CLNC0001      ses-M00    -1   56.1    0
sub-CLNC0002      ses-M00    1    57.2    0
sub-CLNC0003      ses-M00    -1    43.0    1
sub-CLNC0004      ses-M00    -1    25.4    1
sub-CLNC0005      ses-M00    1    74.5    1
sub-CLNC0006      ses-M00    1    44.2    0
sub-CLNC0007      ses-M00    -1    40.2    0
sub-CLNC0008      ses-M00    1    43.2    1
```

## Example
We offer a toy dataset in the folder of **pyHYDRA/data**.

### Running pyHYDRA for clustering CN vs Subtype1 vs Subtype2 vs ...:
```
from from pyHYDRA.hydra_clustering import clustering
feature_tsv="pyHYDRA/data/test_feature.tsv"
output_dir = "PATH_OUTPUT_DIR"
k_min=2
k_max=8
cv_repetition=100
clustering(feature_tsv, output_dir, k_min, k_max, cv_repetition)
```
Note that the above example assume that the input features have been corrected by covariate effects, such as age and sex, if not, one can run:
```
from from pyHYDRA.hydra_clustering import clustering
feature_tsv="pyHYDRA/data/test_feature.tsv"
output_dir = "PATH_OUTPUT_DIR"
k_min=2
k_max=8
cv_repetition=100
covariate_tsv="pyHYDRA/data/test_covariate.tsv"
clustering(feature_tsv, output_dir, k_min, k_max, cv_repetition, covariate_tsv=covariate_tsv)
```

### Running pyHYDRA for binary classification CN vs PT:
```
from pyHYDRA.adml_classification import classification
feature_tsv="pyHYDRA/data/test_feature.tsv"
output_dir = "PATH_OUTPUT_DIR"
cv_repetition=250
classification(feature_tsv, output_dir, cv_repetition)
```

## Citing this work
### If you use this software for clustering:
> Wen, J., Varol, E., Davatzikos, C., 2020. **Multi-scale feature reduction and semi-supervised learning for parsing neuroanatomical heterogeneity**. Organization for Human Brain Mapping.

> Varol, E., Sotiras, A., Davatzikos, C., 2017. **HYDRA: Revealing heterogeneity of imaging and genetic patterns through a multiple max-margin discriminative analysis framework**. Neuroimage, 145, pp.346-364. [doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.02.041](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1053811916001506?via%3Dihub) - [Paper in PDF](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5408358/pdf/nihms762663.pdf)

### If you use this software for classification:
> Wen, J., Samper-González, J., Bottani, S., Routier, A., Burgos, N., Jacquemont, T., Fontanella, S., Durrleman, S., Epelbaum, S., Bertrand, A. and Colliot, O., 2020. **Reproducible evaluation of diffusion MRI features for automatic classification of patients with Alzheimer’s disease**. Neuroinformatics, pp.1-22. [doi:10.1007/s12021-020-09469-5](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12021-020-09469-5) - [Paper in PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.11183)

> J. Samper-Gonzalez, N. Burgos, S. Bottani, S. Fontanella, P. Lu, A. Marcoux, A. Routier, J. Guillon, M. Bacci, J. Wen, A. Bertrand, H. Bertin, M.-O. Habert, S. Durrleman, T. Evgeniou and O. Colliot, **Reproducible evaluation of classification methods in Alzheimer’s disease: Framework and application to MRI and PET data**. NeuroImage, 183:504–521, 2018 [doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.08.042](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.08.042) - [Paper in PDF](https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01858384/document) - [Supplementary material](https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01858384/file/supplementary_data.xlsx)

Commit message:

the way to find optimal C in clustering

README.md, after:

# `pyHYDRA`
**pyHYDRA** is the fast python implementation of the semi-supervised clustering method: [HYDRA](https://github.com/evarol/HYDRA). Moreover, pyHYDRA also allows binary classification tasks following good practice proposed in [AD-ML](https://github.com/aramis-lab/AD-ML).

Compared to the matlab implementation of HYDRA, pyHYDRA has the following advantages:
- Computationally faster with multi-threads implementation;
- More complex cross-validation (CV) strategy, e.g., repeated hold-out CV for 100 repetitions;
- Additional functionality for binary classification following [state-of-the-art](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S105381191630595X) cross-validation procedures.

## Installation
[Ananconda](https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual) allows you to install, run and update python package and their dependencies. We highly recommend the users to install **Anancond3** on your machine.
After installing Anaconda3, there are three choices to use pyHYDRA.
### Use pyHYDRA as a python package
We recommend the users to use Conda virtual environment:
```
1) conda create --name pyHYDRA python=3.6
```
Activate the virtual environment:
```
2) source activate pyHYDRA
```
Install other python package dependencies (go to the root folder of pyHYDRA):
```
3) ./install_requirements.sh
```
Finally, we need install pyHYDRA from PyPi:
```
3) pip install pyHYDRA==1.0.1
```

### Use pyHYDRA from commandline:
To come soon.

### Use pyHYDRA as a developer version:
```
python -m pip install git+https://github.com/anbai106/pyHYDRA.git
```

## Input structure
pyHYDRA requires a specific input structure inspired by [BIDS](https://bids.neuroimaging.io/).
Some conventions for the group label/diagnosis: -1 represents healthy control (**CN**) and 1 represents patient (**PT**); categorical variables, such as sex, should be encoded to numbers: Female for 0 and Male for 1, for instance.

### feature and covariate tsv
The first 3 columns are **participant_id**, **session_id** and **diagnosis**.

Example for feature tsv:
```
participant_id    session_id    diagnosis    ROI1    ROI2 ...
sub-CLNC0001      ses-M00    -1   432.1    596.9
sub-CLNC0002      ses-M00    1    398.2    601.3
sub-CLNC0003      ses-M00    -1    412.0    567.3
sub-CLNC0004      ses-M00    -1    487.4    600.1
sub-CLNC0005      ses-M00    1    346.5    529.5
sub-CLNC0006      ses-M00    1    443.2    663.2
sub-CLNC0007      ses-M00    -1    450.2    599.3
sub-CLNC0008      ses-M00    1    443.2    509.4
```
Example for covariate tsv:
```
participant_id    session_id    diagnosis    age    sex ...
sub-CLNC0001      ses-M00    -1   56.1    0
sub-CLNC0002      ses-M00    1    57.2    0
sub-CLNC0003      ses-M00    -1    43.0    1
sub-CLNC0004      ses-M00    -1    25.4    1
sub-CLNC0005      ses-M00    1    74.5    1
sub-CLNC0006      ses-M00    1    44.2    0
sub-CLNC0007      ses-M00    -1    40.2    0
sub-CLNC0008      ses-M00    1    43.2    1
```

## Example
We offer a toy dataset in the folder of **pyHYDRA/data**.

### Running pyHYDRA for clustering CN vs Subtype1 vs Subtype2 vs ...:
```
from from pyHYDRA.hydra_clustering import clustering
feature_tsv="pyHYDRA/data/test_feature.tsv"
output_dir = "PATH_OUTPUT_DIR"
k_min=2
k_max=8
cv_repetition=100
clustering(feature_tsv, output_dir, k_min, k_max, cv_repetition)
```
Note that the above example assume that the input features have been corrected by covariate effects, such as age and sex, if not, one can run:
```
from from pyHYDRA.hydra_clustering import clustering
feature_tsv="pyHYDRA/data/test_feature.tsv"
output_dir = "PATH_OUTPUT_DIR"
k_min=2
k_max=8
cv_repetition=100
covariate_tsv="pyHYDRA/data/test_covariate.tsv"
clustering(feature_tsv, output_dir, k_min, k_max, cv_repetition, covariate_tsv=covariate_tsv)
```
One more tip about clustering with pyHYDRA: Since HYDRA performs simultaneously clustering based on linear SVM classifiers, eventually constructing a non-linear polytope. The hyperparameter C by default equals 0.25 and not nested cross-validated. One would hope to embed the nested CV procedure inside the clustering framework. However, the major concern is the huge Computational burden due to the clustering nature. a compromise is to use the global binary classification in pyHYDRA (nested CV) to find the optimal C, based on the global population (i.e., healthy controls vs patients). This chosen C will be used for the consequently semi-supervised clustering in pyHYDRA. The essential key of HYDRA algorithm is built based on the idea of **weighted samples** in [LIBSVM](https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvmtools/#weights_for_data_instances). 

### Running pyHYDRA for binary classification CN vs PT:
```
from pyHYDRA.adml_classification import classification
feature_tsv="pyHYDRA/data/test_feature.tsv"
output_dir = "PATH_OUTPUT_DIR"
cv_repetition=250
classification(feature_tsv, output_dir, cv_repetition)
```

## Citing this work
### If you use this software for clustering:
> Wen, J., Varol, E., Davatzikos, C., 2020. **Multi-scale feature reduction and semi-supervised learning for parsing neuroanatomical heterogeneity**. Organization for Human Brain Mapping.

> Varol, E., Sotiras, A., Davatzikos, C., 2017. **HYDRA: Revealing heterogeneity of imaging and genetic patterns through a multiple max-margin discriminative analysis framework**. Neuroimage, 145, pp.346-364. [doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.02.041](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1053811916001506?via%3Dihub) - [Paper in PDF](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5408358/pdf/nihms762663.pdf)

### If you use this software for classification:
> Wen, J., Samper-González, J., Bottani, S., Routier, A., Burgos, N., Jacquemont, T., Fontanella, S., Durrleman, S., Epelbaum, S., Bertrand, A. and Colliot, O., 2020. **Reproducible evaluation of diffusion MRI features for automatic classification of patients with Alzheimer’s disease**. Neuroinformatics, pp.1-22. [doi:10.1007/s12021-020-09469-5](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12021-020-09469-5) - [Paper in PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.11183)

> J. Samper-Gonzalez, N. Burgos, S. Bottani, S. Fontanella, P. Lu, A. Marcoux, A. Routier, J. Guillon, M. Bacci, J. Wen, A. Bertrand, H. Bertin, M.-O. Habert, S. Durrleman, T. Evgeniou and O. Colliot, **Reproducible evaluation of classification methods in Alzheimer’s disease: Framework and application to MRI and PET data**. NeuroImage, 183:504–521, 2018 [doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.08.042](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.08.042) - [Paper in PDF](https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01858384/document) - [Supplementary material](https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01858384/file/supplementary_data.xlsx)
